
opened the way; and Clemenceau's statement, that for him Peace was merely a 
continuation of the War, thus acquired an enhanced significance. 
 
Persistently and on every opportunity that arose, the effort to dislocate the framework 
of the REICH was to have been carried on. By perpetually sending new notes that 
demanded disarmament, on the one hand, and by the imposition of economic levies 
which, on the other hand, could be carried out as the process of disarmament 

progressed, it was hoped in Paris that the framework of the REICH would gradually 
fall to pieces. The more the Germans lost their sense of national honour the more could 
economic pressure and continued economic distress be effective as factors of political 

destruction. Such a policy of political oppression and economic exploitation, carried out 
for ten or twenty years, must in the long run steadily ruin the most compact national 
body and, under certain circumstances, dismember it. Then the French war aims would 
have been definitely attained. 
 
By the winter of 1922-23 the intentions of the French must already have been known for 
a long time back. There remained only two possible ways of confronting the situation. If 
the German national body showed itself sufficiently tough-skinned, it might gradually 
blunt the will of the French or it might do--once and for all--what was bound to become 
inevitable one day: that is to say, under the provocation of some particularly brutal act 
of oppression it could put the helm of the German ship of state to roundabout and ram 
the enemy. That would naturally involve a life-and-death-struggle. And the prospect of 
coming through the struggle alive depended on whether France could be so far isolated 
that in this second battle Germany would not have to fight against the whole world but 

in defence of Germany against a France that was persistently disturbing the peace of the 
world. 
 
I insist on this point, and I am profoundly convinced of it, namely, that this second 
alternative will one day be chosen and will have to be chosen and carried out in one 
way or another. I shall never believe that France will of herself alter her intentions 
towards us, because, in the last analysis, they are only the expression of the French 
instinct for self-preservation. Were I a Frenchman and were the greatness of France so 
dear to me as that of Germany actually is, in the final reckoning I could not and would 
not act otherwise than a Clemenceau. The French nation, which is slowly dying out, not 
so much through depopulation as through the progressive disappearance of the best 

elements of the race, can continue to play an important role in the world only if 
Germany be destroyed. French policy may make a thousand detours on the march 

towards its fixed goal, but the destruction of Germany is the end which it always has in 
view as the fulfilment of the most profound yearning and ultimate intentions of the 
French. Now it is a mistake to believe that if the will on one side should remain only 
PASSIVE and intent on its own self-preservation it can hold out permanently against 
another will which is not less forceful but is ACTIVE. As long as the eternal conflict 
between France and Germany is waged only in the form of a German defence against 
the French attack, that conflict can never be decided; and from century to century 
Germany will lose one position after another. If we study the changes that have taken 
place, from the twelfth century up to our day, in the frontiers within which the German 
language is spoken, we can hardly hope for a successful issue to result from the 

acceptance and development of a line of conduct which has hitherto been so 
detrimental for us. 
 
Only when the Germans have taken all this fully into account will they cease from 
allowing the national will-to-life to wear itself out in merely passive defence, but they 
will rally together for a last decisive contest with France. And in this contest the 
essential objective of the German nation will be fought for. Only then will it be possible 
to put an end to the eternal Franco-German conflict which has hitherto proved so 

sterile. Of course it is here presumed that Germany sees in the suppression of France 
nothing more than a means which will make it possible for our people finally to expand 
in another quarter. To-day there are eighty million Germans in Europe. And our foreign 
policy will be recognized as rightly conducted only when, after barely a hundred years, 
there will be 250 million Germans living on this Continent, not packed together as the 
coolies in the factories of another Continent but as tillers of the soil and workers whose 
labour will be a mutual assurance for their existence. 
 
In December 1922 the situation between Germany and France assumed a particularly 
threatening aspect. France had new and vast oppressive measures in view and needed 
sanctions for her conduct. Political pressure had to precede the economic plunder, and 
the French believed that only by making a violent attack against the central nervous 
system of German life would they be able to make our 'recalcitrant' people bow to their 
galling yoke. By the occupation of the Ruhr District, it was hoped in France that not 
only would the moral backbone of Germany be broken finally but that we should be 
reduced to such a grave economic condition that we should be forced, for weal or woe, 

to subscribe to the heaviest possible obligations. 
 
It was a question of bending and breaking Germany. At first Germany bent and 
subsequently broke in pieces completely. 
 
Through the occupation of the Ruhr, Fate once more reached out its hand to the 
German people and bade them arise. For what at first appeared as a heavy stroke of 
misfortune was found, on closer examination, to contain extremely encouraging 
possibilities of bringing Germany's sufferings to an end. 
 
As regards foreign politics, the action of France in occupying the Ruhr really estranged 
England for the first time in quite a profound way. Indeed it estranged not merely 
British diplomatic circles, which had concluded the French alliance and had upheld it 
from motives of calm and objective calculation, but it also estranged large sections of 

the English nation. The English business world in particular scarcely concealed the 
displeasure it felt at this incredible forward step in strengthening the power of France 
on the Continent. From the military standpoint alone France now assumed a position in 
Europe such as Germany herself had not held previously. Moreover, France thus 
obtained control over economic resources which practically gave her a monopoly that 
consolidated her political and commercial strength against all competition. The most 
important iron and coal mines of Europe were now united in the hand of one nation 
which, in contrast to Germany, had hitherto defended her vital interests in an active and 
resolute fashion and whose military efficiency in the Great War was still fresh in the 
memories of the whole world. The French occupation of the Ruhr coal field deprived 
England of all the successes she had gained in the War. And the victors were now 
Marshal Foch and the France he represented, no longer the calm and painstaking British 
statesmen. 
 
In Italy also the attitude towards France, which had not been very favourable since the 
end of the War, now became positively hostile. The great historic moment had come 
when the Allies of yesterday might become the enemies of to-morrow. If things 
happened otherwise and if the Allies did not suddenly come into conflict with one 
another, as in the Second Balkan War, that was due to the fact that Germany had no 
Enver Pasha but merely a Cuno as Chancellor of the REICH. 
 
Nevertheless, the French invasion of the Ruhr opened up great possibilities for the 
future not only in Germany's foreign politics but also in her internal politics. A 
considerable section of our people who, thanks to the persistent influence of a 
mendacious Press, had looked upon France as the champion of progress and liberty, 
were suddenly cured of this illusion. In 1914 the dream of international solidarity 
suddenly vanished from the brain of our German working class. They were brought 
back into the world of everlasting struggle, where one creature feeds on the other and 
where the death of the weaker implies the life of the stronger. The same thing happened 
in the spring of 1923. 
 
When the French put their threats into effect and penetrated, at first hesitatingly and 
cautiously, into the coal-basin of Lower Germany the hour of destiny had struck for 
Germany. It was a great and decisive moment. If at that moment our people had 
changed not only their frame of mind but also their conduct the German Ruhr District 
could have been made for France what Moscow turned out to be for Napoleon. Indeed, 
there were only two possibilities: either to leave this move also to take its course and do 
nothing or to turn to the German people in that region of sweltering forges and flaming 
furnaces. An effort might have been made to set their wills afire with determination to 
put an end to this persistent disgrace and to face a momentary terror rather than submit 
to a terror that was endless. 
 
Cuno, who was then Chancellor of the REICH, can claim the immortal merit of having 
discovered a third way; and our German bourgeois political parties merit the still more 
glorious honour of having admired him and collaborated with him. 
 
Here I shall deal with the second way as briefly as possible. 
 
By occupying the Ruhr France committed a glaring violation of the Versailles Treaty. 
Her action brought her into conflict with several of the guarantor Powers, especially 
with England and Italy. She could no longer hope that those States would back her up 
in her egotistic act of brigandage. She could count only on her own forces to reap 

anything like a positive result from that adventure, for such it was at the start. For a 
German National Government there was only one possible way left open. And this was 

the way which honour prescribed. Certainly at the beginning we could not have 
opposed France with an active armed resistance. But it should have been clearly 
recognized that any negotiations which did not have the argument of force to back 
them up would turn out futile and ridiculous. If it were not possible to organize an 
active resistance, then it was absurd to take up the standpoint: "We shall not enter into 
any negotiations." But it was still more absurd finally to enter into negotiations without 

having organized the necessary force as a support. 
 
Not that it was possible for us by military means to prevent the occupation of the Ruhr. 
Only a madman could have recommended such a decision. But under the impression 
produced by the action which France had taken, and during the time that it was being 

carried out, measures could have been, and should have been, undertaken without any 
regard to the Versailles Treaty, which France herself had violated, to provide those 

military resources which would serve as a collateral argument to back up the 
negotiations later on. For it was quite clear from the beginning that the fate of this 
district occupied by the French would one day be decided at some conference table or 
other. But it also must have been quite to everybody that even the best negotiators 
could have little success as long as the ground on which they themselves stood and the 
chair on which they sat were not under the armed protection of their own people. A 
weak pigmy cannot contend against athletes, and a negotiator without any armed 
defence at his back must always bow in obeisance when a Brennus throws the sword 
into the scales on the enemy's side, unless an equally strong sword can be thrown into 
the scales at the other end and thus maintain the balance. It was really distressing to 
have to observe the comedy of negotiations which, ever since 1918, regularly preceded 
each arbitrary dictate that the enemy imposed upon us. We offered a sorry spectacle to 
the eyes of the whole world when we were invited, for the sake of derision, to attend 
conference tables simply to be presented with decisions and programmes which had 
already been drawn up and passed a long time before, and which we were permitted to 
discuss, but from the beginning had to be considered as unalterable. It is true that in 
scarcely a single instance were our negotiators men of more than mediocre abilities. For 
the most part they justified only too well the insolent observation made by Lloyd 
George when he sarcastically remarked, in the presence of a former Chancellor of the 
REICH, Herr Simon, that the Germans were not able to choose men of intelligence as 
their leaders and representatives. But in face of the resolute determination and the 
power which the enemy held in his hands, on the one side, and the lamentable 

impotence of Germany on the other, even a body of geniuses could have obtained only 
very little for Germany. 
 
In the spring of 1923, however, anyone who might have thought of seizing the 
opportunity of the French invasion of the Ruhr to reconstruct the military power of 
Germany would first have had to restore to the nation its moral weapons, to reinforce 

its will-power, and to extirpate those who had destroyed this most valuable element of 
national strength. 
 
Just as in 1918 we had to pay with our blood for the failure to crush the Marxist serpent 

underfoot once and for all in 1914 and 1915, now we have to suffer retribution for the 
fact that in the spring of 1923 we did not seize the opportunity then offered us for 
finally wiping out the handiwork done by the Marxists who betrayed their country and 
were responsible for the murder of our people. 
 
Any idea of opposing French aggression with an efficacious resistance was only pure 
folly as long as the fight had not been taken up against those forces which, five years 

previously, had broken the German resistance on the battlefields by the influences 
which they exercised at home. Only bourgeois minds could have arrived at the 

incredible belief that Marxism had probably become quite a different thing now and 
that the CANAILLE of ringleaders in 1918, who callously used the bodies of our two 
million dead as stepping-stones on which they climbed into the various Government 
positions, would now, in the year 1923, suddenly show themselves ready to pay their 

tribute to the national conscience. It was veritably a piece of incredible folly to expect 
that those traitors would suddenly appear as the champions of German freedom. They 
had no intention of doing it. Just as a hyena will not leave its carrion, a Marxist will not 
give up indulging in the betrayal of his country. It is out of the question to put forward 
the stupid retort here, that so many of the workers gave their blood for Germany. 
German workers, yes, but no longer international Marxists. If the German working 
class, in 1914, consisted of real Marxists the War would have ended within three weeks. 
Germany would have collapsed before the first soldier had put a foot beyond the 
frontiers. No. The fact that the German people carried on the War proved that the 
Marxist folly had not yet been able to penetrate deeply. But as the War was prolonged 
German soldiers and workers gradually fell back into the hands of the Marxist leaders, 
and the number of those who thus relapsed became lost to their country. At the 
beginning of the War, or even during the War, if twelve or fifteen thousand of these 
Jews who were corrupting the nation had been forced to submit to poison-gas, just as 
hundreds of thousands of our best German workers from every social stratum and from 

every trade and calling had to face it in the field, then the millions of sacrifices made at 
the front would not have been in vain. On the contrary: If twelve thousand of these 
malefactors had been eliminated in proper time probably the lives of a million decent 
men, who would be of value to Germany in the future, might have been saved. But it 
was in accordance with bourgeois 'statesmanship' to hand over, without the twitch of 
an eyelid, millions of human beings to be slaughtered on the battlefields, while they 

looked upon ten or twelve thousand public traitors, profiteers, usurers and swindlers, 
as the dearest and most sacred national treasure and proclaimed their persons to be 
inviolable. Indeed it would be hard to say what is the most outstanding feature of these 
bourgeois circles: mental debility, moral weakness and cowardice, or a mere down-at-

heel mentality. It is a class that is certainly doomed to go under but, unhappily, it drags 
down the whole nation with it into the abyss. 
 
The situation in 1923 was quite similar to that of 1918. No matter what form of 
resistance was decided upon, the first prerequisite for taking action was the elimination 
of the Marxist poison from the body of the nation. And I was convinced that the first 
task then of a really National Government was to seek and find those forces that were 
determined to wage a war of destruction against Marxism and to give these forces a free 
hand. It was their duty not to bow down before the fetish of 'order and tranquillity' at a 
moment when the enemy from outside was dealing the Fatherland a death-blow and 

when high treason was lurking behind every street corner at home. No. A really 
National Government ought then to have welcomed disorder and unrest if this turmoil 
would afford an opportunity of finally settling with the Marxists, who are the mortal 

enemies of our people. If this precaution were neglected, then it was sheer folly to think 
of resisting, no matter what form that resistance might take. 
 
Of course, such a settlement of accounts with the Marxists as would be of real historical 
importance could not be effected along lines laid down by some secret council or 
according to some plan concocted by the shrivelled mind of some cabinet minister. It 
would have to be in accordance with the eternal laws of life on this Earth which are and 
will remain those of a ceaseless struggle for existence. It must always be remembered 
that in many instances a hardy and healthy nation has emerged from the ordeal of the 
most bloody civil wars, while from peace conditions which had been artificially 

maintained there often resulted a state of national putrescence that reeked to the skies. 
The fate of a nation cannot be changed in kid gloves. And so in the year 1923 brutal 
action should have been taken to stamp out the vipers that battened on the body of the 
nation. If this were done, then the first prerequisite for an active opposition would have 
been fulfilled. 
 
At that time I often talked myself hoarse in trying to make it clear, at least to the so-
called national circles, what was then at stake and that by repeating the errors 
committed in 1914 and the following years we must necessarily come to the same kind 

of catastrophe as in 1918. I frequently implored of them to let Fate have a free hand and 
to make it possible for our Movement to settle with the Marxists. But I preached to deaf 
ears. They all thought they knew better, including the Chief of the Defence Force, until 
finally they found themselves forced to subscribe to the vilest capitulation that history 
records. 
 
I then became profoundly convinced that the German bourgeoisie had come to the end 
of its mission and was not capable of fulfilling any further function. And then also I 
recognized the fact that all the bourgeois parties had been fighting Marxism merely 
from the spirit of competition without sincerely wishing to destroy it. For a long time 
they had been accustomed to assist in the destruction of their country, and their one 
great care was to secure good seats at the funeral banquet. It was for this alone that they 
kept on 'fighting'. 
 
At that time--I admit it openly--I conceived a profound admiration for the great man 
beyond the Alps, whose ardent love for his people inspired him not to bargain with 
Italy's internal enemies but to use all possible ways and means in an effort to wipe them 
out. What places Mussolini in the ranks of the world's great men is his decision not to 
share Italy with the Marxists but to redeem his country from Marxism by destroying 
internationalism. 
 
What miserable pigmies our sham statesmen in Germany appear by comparison with 
him. And how nauseating it is to witness the conceit and effrontery of these nonentities 
in criticizing a man who is a thousand times greater than them. And how painful it is to 
think that this takes place in a country which could point to a Bismarck as its leader as 
recently as fifty years ago. 
 
The attitude adopted by the bourgeoisie in 1923 and the way in which they dealt kindly 
with Marxism decided from the outset the fate of any attempt at active resistance in the 
Ruhr. With that deadly enemy in our own ranks it was sheer folly to think of fighting 
France. The most that could then be done was to stage a sham fight in order to satisfy 
the German national element to some extent, to tranquillize the 'boiling state of the 
public mind', or dope it, which was what was really intended. Had they really believed 
in what they did, they ought to have recognized that the strength of a nation lies, first of 
all, not in its arms but in its will, and that before conquering the external enemy the 
enemy at home would have to be eliminated. If not, then disaster must result if victory 
be not achieved on the very first day of the fight. The shadow of one defeat is sufficient 
to break up the resistance of a nation that has not been liberated from its internal 
enemies, and give the adversary a decisive victory. 
 
In the spring of 1923 all this might have been predicted. It is useless to ask whether it 
was then possible to count on a military success against France. For if the result of the 
German action in regard to the French invasion of the Ruhr had been only the 

destruction of Marxism at home, success would have been on our side. Once liberated 
from the deadly enemies of her present and future existence, Germany would possess 
forces which no power in the world could strangle again. On the day when Marxism is 
broken in Germany the chains that bind Germany will be smashed for ever. For never in 
our history have we been conquered by the strength of our outside enemies but only 
through our own failings and the enemy in our own camp. 
 
Since it was not able to decide on such heroic action at that time, the Government could 
have chosen the first way: namely, to allow things to take their course and do nothing at 
all. 
 
But at that great moment Heaven made Germany a present of a great man. This was 
Herr Cuno. He was neither a statesman nor a politician by profession, still less a 
politician by birth. But he belonged to that type of politician who is merely used for 
liGYMNASIUMating some definite question. Apart from that, he had business 
experience. It was a curse for Germany that, in the practice of politics, this business man 
looked upon politics also as a business undertaking and regulated his conduct 
accordingly. 
 
"France occupies the Ruhr. What is there in the Ruhr? Coal. And so France occupies the 
Ruhr for the sake of its coal?" What could come more naturally to the mind of Herr 
Cuno than the idea of a strike, which would prevent the French from obtaining any 
coal? And therefore, in the opinion of Herr Cuno, one day or other they would certainly 
have to get out of the Ruhr again if the occupation did not prove to be a paying 
business. Such were approximately the lines along which that OUTSTANDING 
NATIONAL STATESMAN reasoned. At Stuttgart and other places he spoke to 'his 
people' and this people became lost in admiration for him. Of course they needed the 
Marxists for the strike, because the workers would have to be the first to go on strike. 
Now, in the brain of a bourgeois statesman such as Cuno, a Marxist and a worker are 
one and the same thing. Therefore it was necessary to bring the worker into line with all 
the other Germans in a united front. One should have seen how the countenances of 
these party politicians beamed with the light of their moth-eaten bourgeois culture 
when the great genius spoke the word of revelation to them. Here was a nationalist and 

also a man of genius. At last they had discovered what they had so long sought. For 
now the abyss between Marxism and themselves could be bridged over. And thus it 
became possible for the pseudo-nationalist to ape the German manner and adopt 

nationalist phraseology in reaching out the ingenuous hand of friendship to the 
internationalist traitors of their country. The traitor readily grasped that hand, because, 
just as Herr Cuno had need of the Marxist chiefs for his 'united front', the Marxist chiefs 
needed Herr Cuno's money. So that both parties mutually benefited by the transaction. 
Cuno obtained his united front, constituted of nationalist charlatans and international 
swindlers. And now, with the help of the money paid to them by the State, these people 
were able to pursue their glorious mission, which was to destroy the national economic 
system. It was an immortal thought, that of saving a nation by means of a general strike 
in which the strikers were paid by the State. It was a command that could be 
enthusiastically obeyed by the most indifferent of loafers. 
 
Everybody knows that prayers will not make a nation free. But that it is possible to 
liberate a nation by giving up work has yet to be proved by historical experience. 
Instead of promoting a paid general strike at that time, and making this the basis of his 
'united front', if Herr Cuno had demanded two hours more work from every German, 

then the swindle of the 'united front' would have been disposed of within three days. 
Nations do not obtain their freedom by refusing to work but by making sacrifices. 
 
Anyhow, the so-called passive resistance could not last long. Nobody but a man 
entirely ignorant of war could imagine that an army of occupation might be frightened 
and driven out by such ridiculous means. And yet this could have been the only 

purpose of an action for which the country had to pay out milliards and which 
contributed seriously to devaluate the national currency. 
 
Of course the French were able to make themselves almost at home in the Ruhr basin 
the moment they saw that such ridiculous measures were being adopted against them. 
They had received the prescription directly from ourselves of the best way to bring a 
recalcitrant civil population to a sense of reason if its conduct implied a serious danger 
for the officials which the army of occupation had placed in authority. Nine years 

previously we wiped out with lightning rapidity bands of Belgian FRANCS-TIREURS 
and made the civil population clearly understand the seriousness of the situation, when 
the activities of these bands threatened grave danger for the German army. In like 

manner if the passive resistance of the Ruhr became really dangerous for the French, the 
armies of occupation would have needed no more than eight days to bring the whole 
piece of childish nonsense to a gruesome end. For we must always go back to the 
original question in all this business: What were we to do if the passive resistance came 
to the point where it really got on the nerves of our opponents and they proceeded to 
suppress it with force and bloodshed? Would we still continue to resist? If so, then, for 
weal or woe, we would have to submit to a severe and bloody persecution. And in that 

case we should be faced with the same situation as would have faced us in the case of 
an active resistance. In other words, we should have to fight. Therefore the so-called 
passive resistance would be logical only if supported by the determination to come out 
and wage an open fight in case of necessity or adopt a kind of guerilla warfare. 
Generally speaking, one undertakes such a struggle when there is a possibility of 
success. The moment a besieged fortress is taken by assault there is no practical 
alternative left to the defenders except to surrender, if instead of probable death they 
are assured that their lives will be spared. Let the garrison of a citadel which has been 
completely encircled by the enemy once lose all hope of being delivered by their 
friends, then the strength of the defence collapses totally. 
 
That is why passive resistance in the Ruhr, when one considers the final consequences 
which it might and must necessarily have if it were to turn out really successful, had no 
practical meaning unless an active front had been organized to support it. Then one 
might have demanded immense efforts from our people. If each of these Westphalians 
in the Ruhr could have been assured that the home country had mobilized an army of 
eighty or a hundred divisions to support them, the French would have found 

themselves treading on thorns. Surely a greater number of courageous men could be 
found to sacrifice themselves for a successful enterprise than for an enterprise that was 
manifestly futile. 
 
This was the classic occasion that induced us National Socialists to take up a resolute 
stand against the so-called national word of command. And that is what we did. During 
those months I was attacked by people whose patriotism was a mixture of stupidity and 
humbug and who took part in the general hue and cry because of the pleasant sensation 
they felt at being suddenly enabled to show themselves as nationalists, without running 
any danger thereby. In my estimation, this despicable 'united front' was one of the most 
ridiculous things that could be imagined. And events proved that I was right. 
 
As soon as the Trades Unions had nearly filled their treasuries with Cuno's 
contributions, and the moment had come when it would be necessary to transform the 
passive resistance from a mere inert defence into active aggression, the Red hyenas 

suddenly broke out of the national sheepfold and returned to be what they always had 
been. Without sounding any drums or trumpets, Herr Cuno returned to his ships. 

Germany was richer by one experience and poorer by the loss of one great hope. 
 
Up to midsummer of that year several officers, who certainly were not the least brave 
and honourable of their kind, had not really believed that the course of things could 
take a turn that was so humiliating. They had all hoped that--if not openly, then at least 
secretly--the necessary measures would be taken to make this insolent French invasion 
a turning-point in German history. In our ranks also there were many who counted at 
least on the intervention of the REICHSWEHR. That conviction was so ardent that it 
decisively influenced the conduct and especially the training of innumerable young 
men. 
 
But when the disgraceful collapse set in and the most humiliating kind of capitulation 

was made, indignation against such a betrayal of our unhappy country broke out into a 
blaze. Millions of German money had been spent in vain and thousands of young 
Germans had been sacrificed, who were foolish enough to trust in the promises made 
by the rulers of the REICH. Millions of people now became clearly convinced that 

Germany could be saved only if the whole prevailing system were destroyed root and 
branch.